\# Pattern 2 - Create a collaborative environment

\## Title

Create a collaborative environment

\## Patlet

Organizational policies and politics create a culture of local
optimization which inhibits collaboration. This is resolved by the
creation of stakeholder boards, guilds, developer exchanges, cross-team
pairing, collaborative decision making via RFCs, and knowledge sharing
forums.

\## Problem

Organizational policies (KPI\'s and incentive structures) and politics
create a culture of local optimization where mid-level managers and
teams focus primarily on achieving their own objectives; this means that
information sharing and collaboration are not a priority for these
organizational units, or this could even be perceived as being at
conflict with the team\'s objectives.

\## Context

\- Large organizations with multiple autonomous Business Units (BU\'s)
lead to the formation of \"\_baronies\_\" in middle and lower
management. - The incentive and KPI measures in place do not consider
InnerSource contributions by teams and this leads to silo-thinking which
in turn prevents widespread adoption of IS across organization. - A
highly politicized and top-down environment could also discourage people
from taking the initiative to explore InnerSource.

\## Forces

\- Another key cause that hinders collaboration and sharing of code is a
sense of \"\_didn\'t build it here\_\" amongst teams. - Lack of trust
between teams over the maintenance of a shared solution which can be
critical to one team while non-critical to another (P07). - Middle
managers (Technical owners and Project managers) face pressure to keep
their teams happy while simultaneously meet deadlines (P04). - Ignorance
of costs associated with a bespoke solution such as licensing,
onboarding, training, and maintaining can cause teams to favor local
optimization (P10). - Hours spent on development needed to be booked
with existing projects under different BU\'s. This led to ambiguity
around booking hours spent on IS projects (P11).

\## Solutions

\- The creation of an ISPO/OSPO/Technical Committee (P01, P04, P08, P11,
P23) which acts as a support mechanism and provides representation to
stakeholders such as developers, agile coaches, engineers, and senior
management. The ISPO/OSPO can work in a decentralized fashion by
providing company-wide guidance but allowing teams to lead the
InnerSource implementation in their area (P04). The ISPO/OSPO has
specialized InnerSource roles such as advocates, community managers to
enhance collaboration (P11). - Modifying and consolidating code
management tools (e.g., GitHub) to facilitate collaboration between
teams (P08, P23). - Creating dedicated communication channels such as in
MS Teams channels, digital events, webpages in intranet where people can
get support and exchange knowledge (P14). - Face-to-face conference of
stakeholder representatives to plan InnerSource implementation and
sustenance (P10).

\## Resulting Context

\- The combination of the above solutions will result in increased
collaboration and a shared understanding of InnerSource across the
organization. - Praise and encouragement by the ISPO/OSPO/Committee will
motivate contributors. - Collaborative code management tools will enable
developers to InnerSource their code and contribute with ease.

##Limitation/Blockers

\- Extensive communication must be done with senior management to bring
different parts of the organization, such as the developers and
technical committee, on board (P08, P11). - Lack of a specialized role
who can train developers in InnerSource (P11).

\## Known Instances

\- This pattern has been identified by seven (P14,
P23,P01,P20,P08,P10,P04) panelists to have been implemented in their
organizations.
